[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with an
extraordinary guest today astaire perel
who i'm very excited about she is
somebody that has clocked an unhuman
number of hours working on people's
relationships she has podcasts around
this stuff
and is one of the most extraordinary
thinkers in terms of the
um what makes a relationship work and
what makes it fall apart astaire welcome
to the show thank you it's my pleasure
to be here
uh i want to start with maybe something
that normally people want to know you
know what are the um the things that
people need to do to have a great
relationship and i want to start with
the inverse what are the things that
kill a relationship
oh there's a long list of things that
kill relationships between partners
but you can apply a lot of these these
downfall principles to any other kind of
relationship
probably and i'm not going to put them
in order of importance but i could the
first one that popped in my head was
complacency
pure laziness
the sense that people often bring the
best of themselves
certainly at work and in other areas and
bring the leftovers to their
relationships which supposedly are meant
to be so important
a lack of communication a breakdown in
communication a profound sense of
distrust of a sense that the other
person is out to get you rather than to
be benevolent and caring of you uh
contempt is the big killer i think it's
the the final blow
because it really implies the
dehumanization of the other person it's
like i don't even i don't it's not that
i don't care about what you think and
what you feel is that you are not worthy
of any attention
um
violence aggression of all kinds the
myriad of situations in which people
attack each other
a complete physical disconnection
loss of affection loss of touch loss of
cuddling lots of all the stuff that
really connects us physically beyond
sexuality to each other i mean i can
i can do a long list right major money
issues
massive amounts of tensions around money
and around discrepancies of
responsibility
imbalances in the relationship in-laws
major fights
this this really is uh an epic list now
i'm tempted to
couples therapist for you i can imagine
which by the way the couple's therapy
that you do both the work show how's
work and then the couple's couples where
should we start those are the names of
the two podcasts
where should we begin excuse me i knew i
was like i'm gonna get the sequence i'm
gonna get the right idea with the wrong
sequence of words
um
it
they're amazing and the way that people
bring vulnerability and the way that
you're able to tease things out is is
honestly astaire it is breathtaking um i
love those shows i cannot speak highly
enough about them and and listening to
them you begin to sort of recognize
themes that undergird a lot of the
different things that you just said and
the one that you started with is
probably the closest complacency
so my wife and i as i mentioned before
we started rolling have been together
now for 20 years and one thing that we
um identified early is what we call
don't let the dust settle so it it seems
to me that a lot of these things end up
being huge problems even the mis the
profound mistrust and all that it
started with love
and it becomes profound mistrust and so
trying to identify like what it was and
the idea that we came up with and i'm
curious to hear if this tracks with what
you know
is in any sort of little moment it's
something small it doesn't seem worth
bringing up so you just let it be but
then over time those little things begin
to stack up and suddenly what once was
you know a beautiful credenza is now
buried under six inches of dust
is it that or is it more profound things
that people fail to dress or don't have
the communication skills to address
i mean
it's a combination of a number of things
you know it's funny i was like i started
talking and i suddenly realized i
literally was canvassing just the
sessions of the week and i could just
the enormous amount of pitfalls that i
could just list as what what will you
know degrade a relationship but when
people start out and they have a lot of
good will and they give a lot of benefit
of the doubt and they make a point of
thanking the other person acknowledging
what they do validating how they feel
the the experience of being seen is part
of the building of the trust the
experience of being known the experience
of having somebody who has deep
attention on you and is curious
fundamentally curious to get to know you
that kind of penetration that is highly
erotic as in you feel alive you feel you
feel vibrant it's not in the sexual
sense of the word erotic
this is what the charge that people feel
you perk up you sit like this
complacency looks like this
that's the position it's like whatever
you know you don't notice anymore you
don't really pay attention you start to
feel like you're a function you know you
are defined by the tasks that you do and
no longer by the person that you are
it's a multitude of those things that
ultimately create step by step a
disconnect
you know um that's what i mean by
complacency it's not it's um it's a
lesser fair like that you know alessia
lee where you you don't notice things
you don't acknowledge them and
the flip side of that is that you
basically just acknowledge the negative
you know you become completely distorted
in your perception you have a big bias
whatever is good isn't is a given
there's nothing to say about it and
whatever is bad can be amplified to the
end degree
it's interesting the way that you even
changed your posture and your movements
uh to really capture that idea so
how do people avoid that like when when
you bring people into your sessions
it's so powerful because you see and
articulate things they don't seem to see
so how is it that people become so blind
to this stuff
because
people in a relationship by the way
especially when they come to couples
therapy you know i'm a couples and
family therapist primarily i'm a
systemically trained therapist i deal
with issues contextually
most of the time when people come to
couples therapy they don't come to say i
came to check myself out
couples therapy is often a drop-off
center you know they come to tell you
here he's my partner
and
what i think is the matter with that
person because i'm an expert on the
other person people stop looking at
themselves because they're completely
focused on what's wrong and what's off
and what's missing in the other
and the first thing you do in couples
therapy is you say to the people we're
going to reach
reconfigure the lens
the day you come in
and you start the session by talking
about what you have done to improve
things or what you have done to
deteriorate things we're working
that is powerful a drop-off location uh
do they both show up saying like oh it's
obviously them or is is it often one of
them is like yo this person is
you know doing all of this wrong or is
it just sort of equal combativeness
you can have three types of dances in a
couple you can have confrontation fight
fight
you can have fight flight one is
fighting the other one is leaving and
then you can have
total distance and you know separating
stone walling whatever it is you know
fight flight flight on both sides so it
you have all the dances you can have
one in which each person comes in and
basically says but you
he
she they
it's the other you know and then on
occasion you have somebody who finally
says
look tom the most amazing thing about
this is i do work with individuals as
well you hear the story of a person you
enter into their subjective world they
tell you this is what's going on in my
house with my partner you know whoever
else is in the house
a few months later you finally meet the
partner and it's like swiss cheese
everything that one person left out the
other person fills in
and you begin to really understand that
you you really need to hear the multiple
voices in a relationship a relationship
is a story
when you only listen to one voice it is
phenomenal how the mind
will curate select discard anything that
is unconvenient uncomfortable about me
it's like
and we comment about that among
clinicians all the time it's like
it's uh it's like because he did this
you can't believe that she said that but
of course the next person comes in and
says well you know she did this and this
and this or he did this and this and
this and then i flipped
but all the preceding stuff gets taken
out by the first person to only talk
about what the other one did to which
they reacted this notion that
you know deteriorated relationships high
conflict relationships are often highly
reactive
and then you only see what what the
other person did to which you reacted
and they made you do this and if they
hadn't done a you wouldn't have done b
without realizing that
your b is their a
so how do we how do we begin to unwind
this and does it tie into the concept so
even just now as you're going through
that you are naming things there's three
types of dances well now that i know the
three types of dances i can go look for
that in my own marriage are there times
where we're fight flight are there times
where we're a fight fight are there
times we're a flight flight and
just having those words
allows me to
introduce a new category to my life are
you familiar with lisa feldman barrett
by any chance
no i've been on a big kick about her
since i had her on the show read um her
book and she talks about basically
having to
create categories that the way the mind
generates an emotion is the body feels
some kind of way and then you go oh this
is anger frustration sadness whatever
and the more categories you create for
yourself the more nuanced you can be in
your response right and i'm curious if
as people
start to untangle this if it's about
giving them the words to begin grouping
what's happening
so it's a combination of things i am
fluent in nine languages
wow
yes so language and words and naming
is extremely important to me
i think that it absolutely organizes
ourselves cognitively
physically emotionally so um
naming is framing
but the naming itself you know needs to
then become also particular to the
person so what you will notice when you
hear where should we begin or how is
work is that i will
i will paraphrase a person i will talk
in the first person imagining what it is
that they may be feeling and then i will
say hot or cold like it's you know the
old game i used to play as a kid and
then if they say hot then i will say now
say it again in your own words
because language shapes the experience
that's fuku that's not me
and once you tell a story you experience
the story the way you have told it
i would say that in where should we
begin and in my clinical world because
they're the same
my goal has always been that you come in
with a story in session one and at the
end of the session you need to leave
with a different story
because we come wedded to that story and
that story articulates our experience
and the meaning we give to our
experience and the title we give to our
relationship and the fate we give to our
relationship if by the end of the three
hours of the first session you leave
with a different story there is movement
the words no longer stick to your skin
and now we can begin to explore what
else is here when people ask you for
sort of blanket statements about
relationships you always push back and
say well that depends on the culture
that we're in and i found that very
interesting because of the way that it
shook me out of thinking that in my own
relationship i had simply uncovered a
truth of
the human condition when in reality i
had uncovered something only about the
cultural context in which i'm in
how does that become important
and is are you looking for ways where
maybe the culture of the two different
people is causing the disconnect like
what's the power of that four step so
this is very much
this is crucial for me at all times but
it is uniquely important now in thinking
about work and relationships in the
workplace as well because
we may use the same language as in we
may use the same words but the meaning
of these words
have something completely different
so you really want to make sure that you
don't assume i know what you're saying
ask remain curious at all times what
does that mean for you
and who told you that
so if i talk about money if i talk about
gender equality if i talk about the role
of the woman in the home if i talk about
the role of the child in the home if i
talk about the aspirations that we bring
to marriage
you know i work with people who come
from cultures where marriages and
happiness have nothing to do with each
other
their happiness comes from the children
the happiness comes from doing the right
thing and maintaining your status and
your place in the community the
happiness doesn't come from talking
intimate pillow talk with your partner
that's that's not the point so marriage
is the word but the definition of
marriage is completely different i did a
course now for three three weeks in a
row it was called forbidden
conversations death sex and money
i had people from 41 countries
the word sex is a word
but the meaning of it
how it is taught what you're allowed to
experience what you're allowed to expect
how do you establish the trust
all of these are culturally defined
money you bet you know so when i ask
people what is a couple for you
how do you define a marriage
what are the expectations that you bring
to marriage and how are your
expectations different from the
generations that preceded you let's do a
genogram let me go down three
generations what did your grandfather
and your grandmother think is marriage
what did they think was the role of the
parents vis-a-vis the children what was
their alliance or their loyalty to their
own parents how much were they allowed
to do what they want and they should do
what is right for them
and how much did they learn that what is
right for them is never separate from
how it affects those that are close to
them
as in individualism versus collectivism
why does all that matter i have a
hypothesis
but why why does that matter i have a
guess but i'm very curious as to why you
get people to contextualize themselves
after starting with you're saying a word
but you don't necessarily know for each
other what it means
this thing about doing the right thing
when i arrived to the us
i worked for many years almost 20 years
with a real focus on working with mixed
couples interracial inter-religious
and inter-cultural families
and this notion of do i have a right to
marry who i want
that's a given for you in north america
that is not a global given
and so when people struggled with that
somebody would say you should do what's
right for you
well the vast majority of the world has
never raised their children to do what's
right for them
they raise the children to do
what's expected from them
you bring that person and everybody
today is a global nomad of sorts
you know people are moving around all
the time and it looks like because they
work in tech or they work in certain
enterprises that look like
they are homogenized in some way that
they think alike
and they don't
if ibm takes 20 000 people that work in
their company they don't think alike
they don't value trust in the same way
they don't have the same conception of
what does it mean to speak up
so i may think you never say anything
well you may think that that's how you
maintain harmony
i think you know you don't you're not
engaged you think you're engaged in
preserving the well-being of the group
i mean you want me to go on or well i
have a another question for you so make
sense what i just said very much so and
so here's what i hear you saying let me
know if this is accurate that
in any context you're going to be coming
from a slightly different place you
could be coming from a different place
because of your particular family you
because of your particular experiences
you could also be coming from a
different place because of your cultural
background or whatever and you have to
essentially define terms
in order to
know what your values are know what each
other expect so that when you're talking
and and i've often said it doesn't
matter what you say it matters what the
other person hears and so effective
communication is about making sure they
hear what you mean
and
that's sort of what i hear here is that
people have to be aware of their context
aware of their partner's context and
then bring that together so that they're
actually having the same conversation
is that what
lends this so much importance
and i will add one piece
the defining of the terms is directly
connected with the meaning of these
terms we are meaning making creatures we
don't live outside of meaning frameworks
it's not just what what is this is
therefore what does it mean for you how
does that define the way that you look
at your life the way that you define
success the way that you define loyalty
the way that you define closeness
it's not we
we need to be aware of it it's a total
given that when a person speaks
in their speech is them their family and
the group that they grew up with the
world they grew up in these things are
always intertwined with each other i
make it explicit because otherwise
people swim in molasses and they have no
idea what's happening to them
it's clarifies its lightens up it brings
air it
you know it ah
that's why
i never knew
you know you say we never talk i think
we don't stop
yeah i had so in my previous company i
had two other partners and there would
be times where we would just be butting
heads and they seem stupid to me i seem
stupid to them and i remember thinking
hold on i know this guy's really bright
and he's not being obstinate for the
sake of being obstinate so
what's going on and i realize that
people have base assumptions that are
driving the use of words or an
expectation and so
like you're saying you know here i am
thinking we talk all the time they're
thinking we never talk and so i'm coming
from the base assumption of we talk all
the time why do we have to talk more
they're coming from the base assumption
of we never talk so like come on engage
and
that has been
that 65
of startups fail because the
relationship between the co-founders
breaks down
i cheated i did know that because i
listened to so much of your content
but yes you were the one that taught me
that i know that comes from a professor
at harvard actually um um and of course
now i'm gonna blank on his name
but he'll come back i i found that
incredible because i'm thinking what an
enormous waste of great ideas because
probably among these people there were
some unique
discoveries that will be completely
wasted but what it also says to me
is that relational intelligence which is
also the ability to hold multiple
perspectives
multiple ways of viewing something at
the same time and to be able to tap into
nuance and ambiguity is
key
you know it's really that that is it's
not just there's they're not stupid you
know of course i know this guy it's kind
of
what are these people doing to each
other
that they're landing in a place
where they end up saying such a thing
when in fact they think the opposite
how do you train somebody to get good at
the
holding that perspective so one would
just be like they have to know what the
other person's perspective is and i'm
curious if i'm not in a room with you
and you're very good at it but how do i
grow to understand their perspective
whether it's my business partner or my
significant other
[Music]
so i'm thinking you know
to put it in context yesterday i worked
with a session on a session
for howie's work
um
and
the woman the she she's a white woman
this white woman who has worked with a
black gay male supervisor they've had a
very very close relationship working
together for a number of years and a
deep friendship
she thinks she left the job
because they were stuck in a salary
negotiation
and on some level she feels that he
didn't stand up for her
but she
she thinks this is the story of two dear
friends
and that's the context
he thinks
this is not just two friends this is two
friends of which one is black and one is
white and of which one person it was
gonna look a certain way if he continues
to negotiate on behalf of a white
woman's salary where there's a lot of
other people there whose salaries are
not being touched
she can psychologize their relationship
and individualize it and make it just
about him and her he can never separate
the friendship from the larger
categories that they both inhabit
a few days earlier and so this is what i
this is the clarification it's like you
know is for to to allow him and her to
to basically realize that they've been
mourning
a different story
and they came they've had a conversation
in their head for a year with each other
and they literally came to try to have
this conversation once and for all
you know
by me basically holding a container for
them and a few days before i'm working
with a couple that own a gym
he
he's the tech he's the thinker he's the
synthesizer he puts it all there out
there and then he you know she
goes in
she's the intuitive you know
in the beginning this was very
attractive to them it was a
complementarity that's another major
rule of relationship the very thing that
people often come in fighting over is
what was once originally very attractive
to each other
when the meaning of the difference was
different so now i'm tracking with them
how did this thing that once was so
attractive to them become a thing from
which they fight with each other at home
they go and have staff meetings and they
basically do their fights in front of
the staff not good not a good idea right
so we're looking at how did the
complementarity turn into a polarization
you know but here is the the the as i'm
saying this
probably the last thing this is a whole
seminar i'm working on relationship is
to explain to people this
you never fight
over the thing that you think you're
fighting over or talk or argue whatever
it is it's not the content
it's rarely the content
if i think that you don't care about me
no matter what we talk about the fact
that that's what i think is going to
permeate how i interpret what you're
saying
if i think that you want my well-being i
will interpret everything you say from
that angle the process shapes the
experience the form is more important
than the content this is like golden
rules if you want to write down the ten
you know and with that
comes the notion
that people fight over three things
primarily power and control
trust and closeness
respect and integrity
and once you know that you start to look
you don't listen for the noise and the
content especially when people have 20
years together you know there's a lot of
stories they can come back to you just
look what is it that they are really
fighting over
what do they experience from each other
at that moment is it about power is it
about trust or is it about recognition
that is so powerful and just to echo it
very quickly my the biggest fight my
wife and i have ever gotten into was
over a cup of tea
and of course the punch line to the
argument was we're not arguing about the
t what is this really about and once we
got to what we were really arguing about
then we could you know defuse the
situation
um it was that i
was feeling disrespected because i
wanted to take her away which
that's actually not true i at the time i
work a lot now but then i worked to the
point of damaging my marriage and my
wife pulled me aside said you're
damaging the marriage we need to take
some time i was so panicked about taking
time off at that point in my career and
we were so poor that spending what 149
on a hotel was like an unimaginable
amount of money to me and
so when the only way i could justify it
was the second we wake up we need to get
in the car get to the hotel so that the
moment we can get into the the room that
we get in we make the most of it
and surprising maximizing yes and she
wanted to like to connect and to bond
and to go slow and for once me not
trying to be efficient and and so she
was you know wanted to have this cup of
tea and just relax into the day
but she wasn't saying that and i wasn't
saying my side of it so i was just like
yo you're gonna have a cup of tea now
and you know just like escalate escalate
escalate until it was absolute madness
and finally me saying this is how i feel
this is why i'm you know upset
and then she could explain to me her
perspective then it was like ah you know
what you were saying of like when you
know what their perspective is and you
can step inside that and go oh wow this
isn't an assault on me this doesn't mean
that you don't have respect for me or
you don't care about what this means to
me it's that you didn't know what it
meant to me because i never articulated
it
and both of you had actually a shared
goal
which you lost sight of
very aggressive you wanted to make this
a special day
you had a different idea of how to do it
that that umbrella notion needs to be
added on there as well yeah completely
very well said
okay so i want to go back to the the
three reasons that we fight respect and
in
integrity and maybe what i didn't
understand about that is i don't
understand how respect and integrity go
together help me understand that um it's
it's actually respect and recognition
but the recognition is about integrity
this is coming from the work of howard
markman this is not my my uh original
thinking and he has a there are a few
more but what it means is
am i seen
is the question of recognition
you know and this scene is a very very
important
experience of bonding it you know you
like evolutionary thinking you know it
is 18 centimeters between the baby and
the parent it is through the eyes that
this bonding takes place the mirror
neurons
are are formed that the the
the oxytocin is released i mean it is
really profound in our
scheme
of bonding so
you have one is power
you have one is trust and then you have
another one which is
you can call it respect and recognition
and you can call it integrity but in the
end it is about
you know the full word the full
definition of the word integrity antegre
which is integrated
as well as it is morally unified it is
also integrated so it's essential to
people
um
it's that that you don't distort my
intention it's that you know where i'm
coming from it's that you um
they all interrelate you know they're
all interrelate but that's that's the
that's the notion
the opposite of respect and recognition
is humiliation shaming
yeah which that to me is
along with contempt and i don't remember
what the official four horsemen of the
apocalypse are i remember that
defensiveness stonewalling and contempt
that's john got yeah
absolutely amazing each one of those
more terrifying than the next
talk to me about roles
how much do we need to define roles
coming in because i found in both
business and in my marriage that being
very clear about roles expectations
desires
meaning desire for your partner like i
desire for you to do x y z
have been very important to finding
harmony yes that's one piece
but the second part
is the ability to have flexibility in
the system that allows people's ideas
beliefs expectations desires to change
so talk to me about that you've said
that we may have multiple relationships
with the same person throughout our life
what do you mean by that
it means that the relationship is
flexible and nimble or what you like to
often call these days we call it agile
enough to
adapt itself to the changes that people
go through if we live as long as we do
and we want relationships that last
decades they're not going to look the
same at 60 that they were at 25.
ester i could literally talk to you
forever and ever and ever about this if
we were going to give people a very
brief sort of um
list of tools that they can use to get
the most out of their relationships not
necessarily their
romantic relationships just
relationships
what does that small bag of tricks look
like
i
would say this ask yourself
what have i done
lately
to affirm the importance of my
relationships in my life
is there someone i owe a phone call to
not a text
a phone call is someone i need to talk
to
that i've been meaning to reach out to
is there someone i owe an apology to
is there
someone who
i could help in this
moment anytime you do for others
you actually are less depressed and b
you feel better about yourself so that's
the first one
second one is what have i done to
nurture my connections
you know am i feeling how am i doing
just kind of sentiment for a minute and
just draw it on a piece of paper how am
i doing then you take two objects
just right now as you sit wherever you
are in front of you and you look one
object that represents
an aspect of your relationship story
that you would like to leave behind that
you would like to free yourself from
that no longer serves you and another
object that represents an aspect of your
relationship story that you would like
to foster to harness to maintain to
develop further
and put these two objects next to you on
your desk
and every day you just ask yourself what
have i done about this one and what am i
doing about that one where am i coming
from and where do i want to go
i love that
sarah where can people engage with you
what's the best place to get more of
your magic
the the port of lavidol is a
stairparel.com
um for any of the people who are coaches
educators relationship professionals hr
people it's sessions
um and the podcasts where should we
begin which is in season four finished
and how is work which we are actually
casting for season two any pairs
colleagues co-workers co-founders who
want to deal with some relationship
issues at work this is the time um
mating in captivity and the state of
affairs are the books
and rekindling desire if you're a couple
that wants to
reinvigorate your own relationship
um those are probably some of the main
ones in the new one thumb that i can
whisper to you is that i actually i'm
having a lot of fun creating
what i think is going to be a fantastic
card game
really yeah all right well sign me up
for that i i am all about that
nice that's cool is it for couples
it's for friends it's for couples it's
for people who've just met and who it's
it's actually no it's not a relationship
game per se but it is
a
it speaks about our relationships
through stories but it's a game it's not
just cards to answer questions
wow it's a game where you can really you
know i like to play games
that's exciting do you have a
date when that's going to be available
probably the end of february
okay soon
i'm excited uh but it's really all on a
stepril.com so um i think that i've said
the main ones right you can do that part
it's very hard to sell one's own
yeah we'll also have all the links but
guys trust me when i say that you're
going to want to read the books listen
to the podcast it's really amazing it
she is one of the unique people that her
breadth of what she can talk about is
extraordinary and the different types of
relationships that she dives in
as you listen to the podcast you will
realize that she is as adept at handling
work problems as she is at handling the
sexual frustrations of
a couple that's you know beginning to
disintegrate it's really really
breathtaking
so be sure to engage heavily and
speaking of things that you should
engage heavily in if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care
once you start to develop a spiritual
relationship of your own understanding
you'll notice wild synchronicities in
your life you'll notice invisible doors
open for you and even though you're a
science guy you have a lot of god in
your life whether you realize it or not
because you wouldn't be sitting here
right now
being driven by this great force of
inspiration doing the major things that
you've done in this world if you hadn't
been tapped into that source
you